Okay, today we are on the case
of the disappearing website, and it is a strange one.
You have a perfectly good design that
for some users just breaks.
We're talking crucial elements just vanishing into thin air.
So let's put on our detective hats and investigate.
First picture the scene.
You've got this beautiful minimalist website.
You know the kind I'm talking about, clean lines,
subtle shadows, and a color palette
that someone probably spent weeks agonizing over.
Everything is exactly where it should be.
It looks perfect, but then a user somewhere out there flips
a single switch on their computer
and instantly all that perfection, just shatters
buttons disappear,
leaving their text just kind of floating in space.
The clean separate sections of the page all mushed together,
the entire design has completely fallen apart.
So the big question is, where did it all go?
I mean, this isn't a bug in the code,
it's not a server crash.
This is something else entirely.
We need to find the culprit.
And our investigation starts with our prime suspect.
It's a feature, not a bug, called forced colors mode.
And it's the key to this whole mystery.
So forced colors mode, which you might also know as
contrast themes on windows, is an accessibility feature.
It basically lets a user throw out the website's carefully
chosen color scheme
and apply their own high contrast one instead.
So the website isn't actually breaking,
it's being intentionally restyled by the operating system
and for a really important reason.
And before you think, oh, this is just some niche
issue, get this.
Approximately 4% of all Windows users rely on this mode.
That adds up to millions of people
who might be seeing a totally broken version
of your site if it's not built to handle this.
And this feature is an absolute
lifeline for so many people.
We're talking about users with low vision,
light sensitivity,
or conditions that can make reading on a screen really
difficult, even painful for them.
Being able to control the colors isn't just a preference,
it's the only thing that makes the
Web usable.
So how does a feature that's designed
to help people end up making websites totally unusable?
Well, the clue isn't understanding exactly
what the system takes over and more
importantly, what it leaves alone.
Now, this right here is the crucial piece of evidence.
The system takes control of all the colors, backgrounds,
text, border colors, you name it.
But it leaves things like structure your border styles
and images totally alone.
And here's the real smoking gun box shadow.
You know that little drop shadow effect.
It isn't just recolored, the system removes it completely.
That little detail is critical.
Okay, with that knowledge,
we can finally round up our usual suspects.
These are the three most common design patterns
that just completely fail when they're put under the
pressure of forced colors mode.
First up, culprit number one, the borderless button.
I mean, this thing is everywhere in modern design, right?
It's sleek, it's minimal,
and its entire shape is defined only
by its background color. A perfect target.
And here's the fatal flaw. The button's entire boundary.
Its whole shape relies on that background color.
But when forced colors mode changes that background
to match the rest of the page
and there's no border to fall back on,
the button's shape just dissolves.
Poof, it becomes invisible.
Alright, our second culprit is honestly
even more dangerous.
A lot of designers like to replace the default browser focus
outline with a much more subtle box shadow.
And yeah, it looks great,
but it creates a massive, massive accessibility failure.
So let's connect the dots here.
We already know that box shadow gets completely
removed, right?
So by also setting outline, none,
the designer has accidentally removed every
possible focus indicator.
A keyboard user now has absolutely no idea
where they are on the page.
The site is now completely unusable for them.
And our final culprit, the SBG icon,
with a hard coded color.
You know these icons are designed
to be a specific brand blue or maybe an action green.
But here's the problem. When you hard code a fill color like
this forced colors mode, just sees it as another color
that it needs to override.
So what if the user's background is black
and the system overrides this icon's fill to also be black?
Well, poof. The icon is gone.
Okay, so the case seems pretty dire, I know,
but here's the twist in our story.
The solutions to all these problems are actually
surprisingly simple and honestly kind of elegant.
They don't require rewriting everything.
They just require thinking a little differently.
Let's start with our poor borderless button.
The fix is something I like to call the invisible shield.
It's a defense that's completely unseen in normal mode,
but it springs into action the second it's needed.
Here's how this little magic trick works.
You give the button a transparent border in normal
mode, you can't see it, right?
So the design looks exactly the same,
but in force colors mode,
the system overrides the color transparent
with a visible system color while keeping the border
is style and width.
And just like that, the button has a boundary.
Again, it shape is preserved. Problem solved.
So what about our disappearing icon?
Well, the solution here is to turn it into a chameleon.
Something that can adapt to its surroundings instantly.
Instead of a hard-coded color,
we use this special CSS keyword, current color.
It's a really cool value that basically tells the SVG it
whatever the current text color is,
just use that for your fill.
Since the text color is always visible in forced colors
mode, the icon automatically inherits
that same visible color.
It just works. So
after all this detective work, what have we really learned?
Well, it's not just about a few clever CSS tricks.
It's about a fundamental shift in
how we should be thinking about design in the first place.
You see, these aren't just fixes
for some niche accessibility feature using transparent
borders, reliable outlines and adaptive icons.
Make sure design more robust for everyone.
It's about communicating information through structure,
not just through pretty surface level styling.
This is the checklist for a truly resilient,
user-focused design.
And that really leaves us
with one final provocative question to think about.
Is your design built to be beautiful
or is it built to be used?
The very best designs, the ones
that truly solve the case, managed to be both.
Thanks for joining me.